		     Roberto Bolaño's 
 $$$$$$\   $$$$$$\   $$$$$$\   $$G$$$$\  
$$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ 
\__/  $$ |$$ /  \__|$$ /  \__|$$ /  \__|
 $$$$$$  |$$$$$$$\  $$$$$$$\  $$$$$$$\  
$$  ____/ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ 
$$ |      $$ /  $$ |$$ /  $$ |$$ /  $$ |
$$$$$$$$\  $$$$$$  | $$$$$$  | $$$$$$  |
\________| \______/  \______/  \______/ 
...........................................................................

	The first time that Jean-Claude Pelletier read Benno von Archimboldi
was Christmas 1980, in Paris, when he was nineteen years old and
studying German literature.

The book in question was D'Arsonval.

ThJüngerians e young Pelletier didn't realize at the time that the novel was part
of a trilogy (made up of the English-themed The Garden and the
Polish-themed The Leather Mask, together with the clearly
French-themed D'Arsonval), but this ignorance or lapse or
bibliographical lacuna, attributable only to his extreme youth, did
nothing to diminish the wonder and admiration that the novel stirred
in him.                           

	From that day on (or from the early morning hours when he concluded
his maiden reading) he became an enthusiastic Archimboldian and set
out on a quest to find more works by the author. This was no easy
task.

Getting hold of books by Benno von Archimboldi in the 1980s, even in
Paris, was an effort not lacking in all kinds of difficulties. Almost
no reference to Archimboldi could be found in the university's German
department. 

Pelletier's professors had never heard of him.

One said he thought he recognized the name. 

Ten minutes later, to Pelletier's outrage (and horror), he realized
that the person his professor had in mind was the Italian painter,
regarding whom he soon revealed himself to be equally ignorant.

	Pelletier wrote to the Hamburg publishing house that had published
D'Arsonval and received no response.

He also scoured the few German bookstores he could find in Paris. The
name Archimboldi appeared in a dictionary of German literature and in
a Belgian magazine devoted-whether as a joke or seriously, he never
knew- to the literature of Prussia.

In 1981 he made a trip to Bavaria with three friends from the German
department, and there, in a little bookstore in Munich, on
Voralmstrasse, he found two other books: the slim volume titled
Mitzy's Treasure, less than one hundred pages long, and the
aforementioned English novel, The Garden.

	Reading these two novels only reinforced the opinion he'd already
formed of Archimboldi.

In 1983, at the age of twenty-two, he undertook the task of
translating D'Arsonval. No one asked him to do it.

At the time, no French publishing house was interested in publishing
the German author with a funny name.

Essentially Pelletier set out to translate the book because he liked
it, and because he enjoyed the work, although it also occurred to him
that he could submit the translation prefaced with a study of the
Archimboldian oeuvre, as his thesis, and why not?- as the foundation
of his future dissertation.

	He completed the final draft of the translation in 1984, and a Paris
publishing house, after some inconclusive and contradictory readings,
accepted it and published Archimboldi. Though the novel seemed
destined from the start not tel sell more than a thousand copies, the
first printing of three thousand was exhausted after a couple of
contradictory, positive, even effusive reviews, opening the door for
second, third, and fourth printings.

	By then Pelletier had read fifteen books by the German writer,
translated two others, and was regarded almost universally as the
preeminent authority on Benno von Archimboldi across the length and
breadth of France.

  				.				

	Then Pelletier could think back on the day when he first read
Archimboldi, and he saw himself, young and poor, living in a chambre
de bonne, sharing the sink where he washed his face and brushed his 
teeth with fifteen other people who lived in the same dark garret,
shitting in a horrible and notably unhygienic bathroom that was more
like a latrine or cesspit, also shared with fifteen residents of the
garret, some of whom had already returned to the provinces, their
respective university degrees in hand, or had moved to slightly more
comfortable places in Paris itself, or were still there- just a few of
them- vegetating or slowly dying of revulsion.

	He saw himself, as we've said, ascetic and hunched over his German
dictionaries in the weak light of a single bulb, thin and dogged, as
if he were pure will made of flesh, bone, and muscle without an ounce
of fat, fanatical and bent on success.

A rather ordinary picture of a student in the capital, but it worked
on him like a drug, a drug that brought him to tears, a drug that (as
one sentimental Dutch poet of the nineteenth century had it) opened
the floodgates of emotion, as well as the floodgates of something that
at first blush resembled self-pity but wasn't (what was it, then?
rage? very likely), and made him turn over and over in his mind, not
in words but in painful images, the period of his youthful
apprenticeship, and after a perhaps pointless long night he was forced
to two conclusions: first, that his life as he had lived it so far was
over; second, that a brilliant career was opening up before him, and
that to maintain its glow he had to persist in his determination, in
sole testament to that garret. This seemed easy enough.

  				.				

	Jean-Claude Pelletier was born in 1961 and by 1986 he was already a
professor of German in Paris. Piero Morini was born in 1956, in a town
near Naples, and although he read Benno von Arcimboldi for the first
time in 1976, or four years before Pelletier, it wasn't until 1988
that he translated his first novel by the German author, Bifurcaria
Bifurcata, which came and went almost unnoticed in Italian bookstores.

	Archimboldi's situation in Italy, it must be said, was very different
from his situation in France, for one thing, Morini wasn't his first
translator. 

As it happened, the first novel by Archimboldi to fall into Morini's
hands was a translation ofone by someone called
Colossimo for Einaudi in 1969. 

In Italy,  The Leather Mask was followed by Rivers of Europe in 1971,
Inheritance in 1973, and railroad perfection in 1975; earlier in 1964,
a publishing house in Rome had put out a collection of mostly war
stories, titled The Berlin Underworld. 

So it could be said that Archimboldi wasn't a complete unknown in
Italy, although one could hardly claim that he was successful, or
somewhat successful, or even barely successful.

In point of fact, he was an utter failure, an author whose books
languished on the dustiest shelves in the stores or were remaindered
or forgotten in publishers' warehouses before being pulped.

	Morini of course, was undaunted by the scant interest that
Archimboldi's work aroused in the Italian public, and after he
translated Bifurcaria Bifurcata he wrote two studies of Archimboldi
for journals in Milan and Palermo, one on the role of fate in Railroad
Perfection, and other on the various guises of conscience and guilt in
Lethaea, on the surface an erotic novel, and in Bitzius, a novel less
than one hundred pages long, similar in some ways to Mitzi's Treasure,
the book that Pelletier had found in an old Munich bookstore, and that
told the story of Albert Bitzius, a pastor of Lützelflüh, in the
canton of Bern, an author of sermons as well as writer under the
pseudonym Jeremiah Gotthelf. 

Both pieces were published, and Morini's eloquence or powers of
seduction in presenting the figure of Archimboldi overcame all
obstacles, and in 1991 a second translation by Piero Morini, this time
of Saint Thomas, was published in Italy. By then, Morini was teaching
German literature at the university of Turin, the doctors had
diagnosed him with multiple sclerosis, and he had suffered the strange
and spectacular accident that left him permanently wheelchair bound.

  				.				

Manuel Espinoza came to Archimboldi by a different route. Younger than
Morini and Pelletier, Espinoza studied spanish literature, not German
literature, at least for the first two years of his university career,
among other sad reasons because he dreamed of being a writer. The only
German authods he was (barely) familiar with were three greats:
Hölderlin, because at sixteen he thought he was feted to be a poet and
he devoured every book of poetry he could find; Goethe, because in his
final year of secondary school a teacher with a humorous streak
recommended that he read The Sorrows of Young Werther, in whose hero
he would find a kindered spirit; and Schiller, because he had read one
of his plays.

Later he would discover the work of a modern author, Jünger, with whom
he became acquainted more by osmosis than anything else, since the
Madrid writers he admired (and deep down hated bitterly) talked
nonstop about Jünger.

So it could be said that Espinoza was acquainted with just one German
author, and that author was Jünger.

At first he thought Jünger's, work was magnificent, and since many of
the writer's books were translated in Spanish, Espinoza had no trouble
finding them and reading them all.

He would have preferred it to be less easy.

Meanwhile, many of his acquaintances weren't just Jünger devotees;
some of them were the author's translators, too, which was something
Espinoza cared little about, since the glory he covered was that of
the writer, not the translator.

	As the months and years went by, silently and cruelly, as is
often the case, Espinoza suffered some misfortunes that made him
change his thinking. It didn't take long, for example, to discover
that the group of Jüngerians wasn't as Jüngerian as he had thought,
being instead, like all literary groups in thrall to the changing
seasons.

In the fall, it's true, they were Jüngerians, but in winter they
suddenly turend to Barojians and in spring to Orteganites, and in
summer they would even leave the bar where they met to go out in the
street and intone pastoral verse in honor of Camilo José Cela,
something that the young Espinoza, who was fudamentally patriotic,
could have been prepared to accept unconditionally if such displays
had been embarked on in a fun-loving carnivalesque spirit, but who
could in no way take it all seriously, as did the bogus Jüngerians.

	Worse was discovering what the members of the group thought
about his own attempts at fiction. Their opinion was so negative that
there were times-some nights, for example, when he couldn't sleep-that
he began to wonder in all seriousness whether they were making a
veiled attempt to get him to go away, stop bothering them, never show
his face again.
	And even worse was when Jünger showed up in person in Madrid
and the group of Jüngerians , organized a trip to El Escorial for him 
(a strange whim of the maestro, visiting El Escorial), and when Espinoza 
tried to join the excursion in any capacity whatsoever, he was denied the honor, 
as if the Jüngerians deemed him unworthy of making up part of the German's 
garde du corps, or as if they feared that he, Espinoza, might embarrass them 
with some naïve, abstruse remark, although the official explanation
given (perhaps dictated by some charitable impulse) was that he didn't
speak German and everyone else who was going on the picnic with Jünger
did.

   				.				

That was the end of Espinoza's dealings with the Jüngerians. And it
was the beginning of is loneliness and a steady stream (or deluge) of
resolutions, often contradictory or impossible to keep.

These weren't comfortable nights, much less pleasant ones, but
Espinoza discovered two things that helped him mightily in the early
days: he would never be a fiction writer, and, in his own way, he was
brave.

	He also discovered that he was bitter and full of resentment,
that he oozed resentment, and that he might easily kill someone,
anyone, if it would provide a respite from the loneliness and rain and
cold of Madrid, but this was a discovery that he preferred to conceal.

Instead he concentrated on his realization that he would never be a
writer and on making everything he possibly could out of his newly
unearthed bravery.

	He continued at the university, studying Spanish literature,
but at the same time he enrolled in the German department. 

He slept four or five hours a night and the rest of the time he spent on his
desk. 

Before he finished his degree in German literature he wrote a
twenty-page essay ion the relationship between Werther and music,
which was published in a Madrid literary magazine and a Göttingen
university journal.

By the time he was twenty-five he had completed both degrees. 

In 1990, he received his doctorate in German literature with a
dissertation on Benno von Archimboldi.

A Barcelona publishing house brought it out one year later.

By then, Espinoza was a regular at German literature conferences and
roundtables.

His command of German was, if not excellent, more than passable. 

He also spoke English and French. 

Like Morini and Pelletier, he had a good job and a substantial income,
and he was respected (to the extent possible) by his students as well
as his colleagures. 

He never translated Archimboldi or any other German author.

   				.				

Besides Archimboldi, there was one thing Morini, Pelletier, and
Espinoza had in common. 

All three had iron wills.

Actually, they had one other thing in common, but we'll get to that
later.

	Liz Norton, on the other hand, wasn't what one would
ordinarily call a woman of great drive, which is to say that she
didn't draw up long- or medium-term plans and throw herself
wholeheartedly into their execution.

She had none of the attributes of the ambitious.

When she suffered, her pain was clearly visibe, and when she was
happy, the happiness she felt was contagious. 

She was incapable of setting herself a goal and striving steadily
towards it.

At least, no goal was appealing or desirable enough for her to pursue
it unreservedly.

Used in a personal sense, the phrase "achieve an end" seemed to her a
small-minded snare.

She preferred the word life, and, on rare occasions happiness.

If volition is bound to social imperatives, as William James believed,
and it's therefore easier to go to war than it is to quit smoking, one
could say that Liz Norton was a woman who found it easier to quit
smoking than to go to war.

	This was something she'd been told once when she was a
student, and she loved it, although it didn't make her read William
James, then or ever. 

For her, reading was directly linked to pleasure, not to knowledge or
enigmas or constructions or verbal labyrinths as Morini, Espinoza,
and Pelletier believed it to be.

	Her discovery of Archimboldi was the least traumatic of all,
and the least poetic. During the three months that she lived in Berlin
in 1988, when she was twenty, a German friend loaned her aaa novel by
an author she had never heard of. 

The name puzzled her.

How was it possible, she asked her friend, that there could be a
German writer with an Italian surname but with a von preceding it,
indicating some kkind of nobility?

Her German friend had no answer.

It was probably a pseudonym, he said.

And to make things even stranger, he added, masculine proper names
ending in vowels were uncommon in Germany.

Plenty of of feminine proper names ended that way but certainly not
masculine proper names.

The novel was The Blind Woman, and she liked it, but not so much that
made her go running out to buy everything else that Benno von
Archimboldi had ever written.


   				.				


Five months later, back in England again, Liz Norton received a gift
in the mail from her German frien. 

As one might guess, it was another novel by Archimboldi.

She read it, liked it, went to her college library to look for more
books by the German with the Italian name, and founf two: one was the
book she had already read in Berlin, and the other was Bitzius.

Reading the latter really did make her go running out.

It was raining in the quadrangle, and the quadrangular sky looked like
the grimace of a robot or a god made in our own likeness.

The oblique drops rain slid down the blades of grass in the park, but
it would have made no difference had they slid up.

Then the oblique (drops) turned round (drops), swallowed up by the
earth underpinning the grass, and the grass and the earth seemed to
talk, no, not talk, argue, their incomprehensible words like
crystallized spiderwebs or the briefest crystallized vomitings, a
barely audible rustling, as if instead of drinking tea that afternoon,
Norton had drunk a steaming cup of peyote.

	But the truth is that she had only had tea to drink and
she felt overwhelmed, as if a voice were repeating a terrible prayer in
her ear, the words of which blurred as she walked away from the
college, and the rain wetted her skirt and bony knees and pretty
ankles and little else, because before Liz Norton went running through
the park, she hadn't forgotten to pick up her umbrella.

   				.				

The first time Pelletier, Morini, Espinoza, and Norton saw each other
was at a contemporary German literature conference held in Bremen in
1994.

Pelletier and Morini had met before, during the German literature
colloquiums held in Leipzig in 1989, when GDR was in death throes, and
then they saw each other again at the German literature symposium held
in Mannheim in December of the same year (a disaster, with bad hotels,
bad food, and abysmal organizing).

At a modern German literature forum in Zurich in 1990, Pelletier and
Morini met Espinoza.

Espinoza saw Pelletier again at a twentieth-century German literature
congress held in Maastricht in 1991 (Pelletier delivered a paper
titled "Heine and Archimboldi: Converging Paths"; Espinoza delivered a
paper titled "Ernst Jünger and Benno von Archimboldi: DIverging
Paths"), and it could more or less be safely said that from that
moment on they not only read each other in scholarly journals, they
became friends, or they struck up something like a friendship.

In 1992, Pelletier, Espinoza, and Morini ran into each other again at
a German literature seminar in Augsburg.

Each was presenting a paper on Archimboldi.

For a few months it had been rumored that Benno von Archimboldi himself
planned to attend this grand event, which would convene not only the
usual Germanists but also a sizable group of German writers and poets,
and yet at the crucial moment, two days before the gathering, a
telegram was received from the Archimboldi's Hamburg publishers
tendering his apologies.

In every other respect, too, the conference was a failure.

In Pelletier's opinion, perhaps the only thing of interest was a
lecture given by an old professor from Berlin on the work of Arno
Schmidt (here we have a German proper name ending in a vowel), a
judgement shared by Espinoza and, to a lesser extent, by Morini.

	They spent the free time they had, which was ample, strolling
the paltry (in Pelletier's opinion) sites of interest in Augsburg, a
city that Espinoza also found paltry, and that Morini found only
moderately paltry, but still paltry in the final analysis, while
Espinoza and Pelletier took turns pushing the Italian's wheelchair
since Morini wasn't in the best of health this time, but rather in
paltry health, so that his two friends and

